And we're rolling, and we're talking to Judith Guest.
And this book, I guess, is 10 years in the making.
Is that right?
Yeah, I quit counting it 10 years.
Mine took eight, so I'm sympathetic.
Somebody I was talking to just the other day said, well, hey, you were working on it back in Dutada.
And I thought, ooh, that's more than 10 years ago.
Now, why 10?
I mean, why so long, let's say?
Well, you know, it's...
It's basically the story of my grandparents.
And so it's a family, it's partly a family history.
And I think I was kind of intimidated by it.
Just trying to get things just right.
You know, and I do that all the time.
And then I always end up reminding myself, hey, there is no right.
This is just subjective.
Anybody else in this family who wrote this book would write it
probably a lot differently than I would write it.
But it's like a lesson you have to keep learning over and over and over again.
Even though, as I do understand, it is inspired by a family experience, your grandparents, I guess.
Is that right?
Yeah.
It's a novel, though.
But that's, of course, that's where I'm going.
Next point.
The fact that it's inspired, I mean, it still is a novel.
It is.
And you felt free to invent, I assume.
Yes, I did.
But I think I feel a lot freer to invent when I know it's a novel.
And when half of me is saying, yeah, but this really happened,
It makes it a lot harder.
And I don't even know if it was the hardness of it that made it take so long.
I think it's more, it had something to do with commitment.
I think I was really scared to commit to it.
It just seemed like it was so important to me.
You know, I mean, so many authors I've talked to over the years, and they all say, you know, when you write about yourself or your own family, you are laying yourself naked before the world.
And do you feel similarly?
I'm exposing things that maybe that might, that other members of the family might be sensitive about your writing about.
No, that doesn't really...
do it for me. I've tried to figure that out myself, what it is. It's more of an internal thing I think. It's not so much that I'm thinking oh I better not write about this because you know they might be upset. I didn't and I don't think that now. I don't think that any anybody in my family is going to read that book and be upset about anything that's in it. In fact I'm sure of it, but um
It's your relationship to the work, I think, that is in peril all the time.
And are you doing this story justice?
Are you telling it right?
Are you making things up that didn't really happen?
Which, of course, as soon as it becomes a novel, you are doing.
And you have to do.
And in fact, the last year of writing, I spent editing out.
And I cut out 100 pages.
Really?
Last year.
Manuscript pages.
Yeah.
That's tough, isn't it?
It's all stuff that I had to keep telling myself.
My husband gave me the little talisman.
He said, just because it happened doesn't mean you've got to put it in the book.
I know.
Every time I'd come to something and it wasn't quite working, I'd say that, and I'd say, yep, I like this piece.
This is important to me personally, but it doesn't do anything to
to advance the plot of the book.
That's right.
That's the fundamental leap from the nonfiction writer to the fiction writer.
Right, exactly.
And it's very hard to make when you do feel so much that you're telling a family story.
It's very hard to do.
I mean, the stuff seems like it's set in cement, you know?
Now, when you say a family story, are you talking generically or are you talking about your own family or both?
Because you do write family stories.
I'm talking both.
Yeah.
But, yeah, I am talking,
generically, I'm talking about my family. Why this novel was so much harder than any other novel that I've written? But I mean you also write family stories in a generic sense I guess is what I'm saying. Yeah yeah. What I'm doing is what I'm doing is seguing into another area. It's the only thing I'm interested in writing about, and it's probably and it's the only thing I ever will be interested in writing. And why is that?
Why is that? That's simple he asked. It's the only thing that I'm interested in. He said that? But I have to believe you're interested in other things. I mean as soon as I say that, I think yeah but I wrote a mystery novel but I did write a mystery novel with with my friend Rebecca Hill um but it was also a family story. I mean it was about a family
I don't know.
No, I guess I've got to say it is about the only thing that I'm interested in.
Well, no, you certainly had the family here when you began, and, you know, your reviewers do point out that you are, they suggest that you are a character-driven novelist.
Would you agree with that?
So did you start here with the characters or with the concept and the premise?
Well, you know, I've had that question asked to me before about all of my novels, and I never know how to answer that.
It isn't an either-or thing.
So what happens?
I start with the characters, but the characters aren't just in a vacuum.
They're doing something, and something has happened to them.
And so it seems like it all comes at once.
Well, I mean, do you have a sense of story when you start?
Yeah, I do have a sense of story and I often have a sense of ending of story.
And sometimes that ending stays and sometimes it doesn't.
And as you've pointed out in other interviews, these things take on life of their own.
Well, yeah, they better.
I mean, they certainly develop their own energy.
I mean, they go big.
And that's true.
I mean, you know, I've interviewed a thousand authors.
That's not an exaggerated number over the last 20 years.
And then having done my own book, it's these things go where they want to go.
Yeah.
And, you know, and I've read.
I've read interviews where people have said, oh, that's just crazy.
You're the boss.
You're in charge.
It's not true.
You're able to do what you want to do.
And I think, boy, that sure ain't the way it works for me.
Yeah, well, my book was 638 pages, 250,000 words, and I didn't have an outline for it.
Uh-huh.
You know, I mean, you have general areas, but the thing goes.
Yeah, right.
No, I don't work from an outline either.
I mean, I feel like if I worked from an outline, I wouldn't even have to write it.
If I had it all outlined and I knew where it was going.
Then it's not fun.
Then you're not interested.
It would just be, okay, today I get up and do this, this, and this.
I mean, part of the fun is sitting there wondering where you're going to go today.
Is this, you mentioned that the only subjects that interest you as a novelist are families, domestic relationships.
So therefore it's a corpus then, isn't it, what you've done?
They're all popular.
Part of the same story, only with looking at it from different sides.
Right.
Is that fair?
Yeah, that is fair.
And as my friend Rebecca said about our mystery novel, well, we're just working the other side of the street here.
She said the funniest thing to me.
She said, you know, because she's a novelist, too.
And she said, normally what we're doing when we're writing a regular novel is we're looking for every avenue where people...
can solve their problems short of murder.
And she said, in this novel, we're going right to the whip.
Now, I have quite a few papers in the Midwest, I should point out, that take my stuff.
Grand Rapids takes me, Toledo takes me, Des Moines, Wichita...
And so I just jump when I have an opportunity to do a Midwestern novelist, a writer.
Would you categorize yourself as a Midwestern novelist?
Do you come out of any kind of regional tradition, do you think?
I don't know what regional tradition means.
But yeah, I'm a Midwestern novelist.
I live in the Midwest.
Well, I mean, of course, that's where you live.
But I mean, in terms of...
How important is place, for instance?
Well, you know, actually, I think place is pretty important, and it's very important in this novel.
I mean, you had to have that setting, certainly.
Well, I did, yeah.
And it's the setting that I know best, and it's the setting that I love best.
And actually, a lot of that hundred pages that came out was...
was placed even though I think I left a lot in I took a lot out and I realized it was sort of self-indulgent it was like yeah but I've been there and it's beautiful and I want to describe it and I want to go there again in my writing and so I would say yeah I guess I am
I guess I am a regional writer.
Now, tell me about your accent.
It almost sounds a little Chicago-y.
Or is that a Michigan accent?
I grew up in Detroit.
Okay.
I lived in Chicago.
You did?
Yeah.
All right.
I was living in Chicago when I wrote Ordinary People.
Mm-hmm.
You know, so many of my readers, I'd love to tell the story of how ordinary people came to be again.
I certainly won't dwell on it to any great length, but it is a pretty remarkable publishing story, isn't it?
It really is.
Could you just, if you have a few minutes to read?
The most remarkable thing about it is that I didn't realize at the time how remarkable it was.
I mean, books do not sell over the transom.
You know that, right?
Well, I had a great editor, and she was a junior editor at the time.
Who was she?
Her name was Mimi Jones, and she was a good editor.
This was at Viking, right?
Yeah, this was at Viking.
And she really helped me after they bought it.
She really helped me.
Now, did you just send it to whom it made concern?
Yeah, I did.
You didn't even have a name?
No, not for that one.
They were the third publisher.
And the first publisher, I didn't have a name.
The second publisher, I did have a name.
And they said, nah, we don't like this.
And so the third one, no, I just... Actually, the third one, you know what I did?
I just looked in my bookcase and looked at all the books that I had and who published the ones I liked the best.
So which Viking books impressed you?
There were a lot of Viking books there, and I thought, well, maybe this is like horse racing.
I like them, so maybe they'll like me.
And then Mimi read it and liked it a lot and wrote me a very cautious letter about it about five months before they even bought it.
And for five months.
So how long did the dance go on for about a year?
Eight months.
Eight months before they bought it.
But for five months, she just went on a campaign to get some other editors to read it.
Jeez.
And she finally did it.
So, I mean, she was a good editor, but if she were less forceful and less aggressive, you know, it could have... Today, junior editors don't even have that much clout.
Yeah.
You know, my book, it took 13 months to sell it.
Holt bought it.
I was orphaned at Random House.
The worst thing that could ever befall a writer, as you probably have heard, you know.
Were you at Random House?
I'm sorry?
What did you say?
My book had originally been under contract at Random House.
Oh, really?
And, oh, it's a great story.
I mean, and then my editor left and went to another house.
Oh, that's the worst.
It's the worst.
I know.
I've got friends here who that's happened to.
It's terrible.
It's disastrous.
And then it came at a time when, I'm going to shut off the tape because I want to transmit it.
But so anyway, you said this.
Now, how old were you when this was?
40.
I was 40 when it was published.
You were 40?
Yeah.
And so, I mean, you weren't some starry-eyed young kid who said, I think I'll write a novel now.
No, and that was very helpful.
Because what happened afterwards would be enough to, like, seek you if you were in your 20s.
Yeah.
It's pretty scary stuff.
And when it finally was purchased, did you expect the kind that became, what, a five-month New York Times bestseller?
Yeah, uh-huh.
Well, that's what was fun about it.
I didn't expect anything.
I didn't know what to expect.
So everything that happened was like, whoa, another Christmas present in July.
Yeah, it was pretty fun.
And then, of course, when Redford...
Redford called and said, I would like to buy this book.
He called you?
Did he call you?
He called Viking.
Oh, that's great.
Yes, then he did call me.
He did call me, and I didn't believe it was him.
My brothers are always calling me up and stuff like that.
That's a great story.
Hello, Judith.
This is Robert Redford.
I go, yeah, sure.
Yeah, right.
Right.
Well, I got a call a year ago this week.
It was from the Boston Globe, and I thought they were trying to sell me a subscription, you know.
I said, what are you calling me on a Sunday night for?
She said, we want to comment.
Your book has just been nominated for National Book Riddick Circle.
My voice went up two octaves, you know.
Oh, really?
I love that when it happens.
I love the title, errands.
Oh, God, I love to hear that when someone says that.
And you even gave us an epigraph to explain it.
Yeah, well... How often do you see that in a novel, you know?
I get to do that because some people at Valentine didn't like the title, and they wanted me to change it.
And it's the same thing that happened to me with ordinary people, so...
Then I have to scramble and explain why, no, actually this is a great title.
Yeah, well, so maybe explain it for me.
I have your explanation, but when did you have the title?
Oh, really early on.
Really early on.
And it just felt right.
And, you know, that's the difficulty.
I don't think I can explain it exactly.
But I knew that was the right title for this book.
And I think it's partly that...
errands seem to be a woman's task, and it's a huge part of your life, and that if you treat them sort of... If you treat them like, oh, man, I've got to get these errands done, and then I can live my life, you're sort of chucking a large part of your life.
And so to me, they seem sort of like, hey, you've got to get a lot of mileage out of these things.
There has to be like a spiritual...
doing, that you really are.
It's gifts that you're giving people.
And I don't know.
Well, I had never heard of the concept of errand as a, you know, I just thought it was something you had to do.
I mean, I never thought of it in terms of this noble thing.
Yeah, well, but I think in the larger sense, it really is.
It's a huge part of a lot of people's lives.
And it's important things that you do for people.
And for yourself.
And that you should kind of be in the moment with them instead of, like, rushing through them.
And plus, then I think about what happens to me when I'm running errands.
I'm meeting people.
I'm talking to clerks.
I'm interacting with the rest of the people.
It seems like it makes you feel...
closer to people but it takes on a higher resonance though I mean it becomes much more than I really do believe this and yet whenever I talk about it it always sounds kind of corny and soupy but so what I mean it's the truth you mentioned that errands usually fall to women do you think that your primary reader is a woman do you have a sense of your reader when you're at all
Yeah, I think my primary reader is a woman, but yeah, yes, I do.
But I also think that a lot of men read fiction, too.
God, I hope so.
And a lot of men don't.
A lot of men don't.
Right now, all men are thinking about the football games this weekend.
Oh, well, it didn't really happen, so why should I read about it?
Doesn't that drive you nuts when you hear that?
Yeah, it does.
Especially it drives me nuts when an interviewer says it.
They do.
Are your people, I mean, you've used the phrase, are your people ordinary people, though?
Oh, I think so.
I think of it in terms of, yeah, well, I think we all are.
And it's
I think it's... But are they going through extraordinary experiences or are these experiences endemic to all of us, would you say?
Yeah, I think that's the biggest lesson, life lesson that people have to learn is that there's a lot of there's a lot of grief and trauma and difficulty in everyone's life.
And it's
It's not really so much what happens to you.
It's how you figure out how to deal with it.
Well, did you see grief here as really kind of a sub... Yeah, I did.
Yeah.
They were... Somebody asked me the other day about... It seems like the subject of Ordinary People and the subject of this book is basically the same.
Did you see it as the same?
And I said, no, I didn't see it the same at all.
I think what I was trying to do in Ordinary People was...
explore the anatomy of depression and figure out and so i had to have an incident that was really what would cause somebody to be that depressed it would have to be something huge that happens to them like a death which actually i got a lot of mail from um from readers saying you know you don't have to have
somebody die in order for you to experience that kind of depression.
And I thought, well, of course you don't.
That's true.
But you're a novelist after all.
I felt like I did.
And so that story was really a made-up story.
But this, my goal in this was to understand, try to learn something more for myself about grief.
and what grief does to a family.
And it really doesn't always pull them together, does it?
No, it doesn't.
In fact, I think most of the time it doesn't.
It does not?
No.
Well, I remember a good friend of mine lost a daughter in her freshman year of college.
She was in an automobile accident.
And I read the statistics afterwards.
And the statistics, you can hardly believe them.
They're so high.
But the statistics are that 90% of people
of couples divorce after the death of a child.
I can believe that.
Jesus, that just seems so incredible.
You know, I mean, I've got two young, two teenage daughters.
I mean, and when you were writing about the dread factor, I mean, a day doesn't go by.
I say, you know, take care of these kids, you know, and you just worry about it every day in the worst case scenarios, you know, and, uh,
And I've never actually seen it phrased quite like that, the dread factor, you know.
But that's what it is.
Yeah, that's what it is.
Yeah, and it's funny because now, of course, all my kids are grown and married and have kids of their own.
And the dread factor can also... Goes to the next generation, doesn't it?
Sure.
But it's different.
I mean, it's not a day-to-day thing.
But I'm nervous when they do stuff...
That makes me nervous.
Oh, yeah.
I think, oh, God, I hope nothing happens while they're gone.
Well, my 15-year-old went out New Year's Eve.
I mean, and it was chaperoned and all this.
But, man, I wasn't happy about that at all.
I wanted to go with them.
I know.
It's such a weaning process, isn't it?
You always think you're weaning your kids to stand on your own, but you're really weaning yourself.
I said, I'll come.
I'll come.
I'll drive.
I'll be the driver.
Yeah.
Thanks, Dad, but no kidding.
No, everything was fine.
Anyway, you've done a lot of interviews, so I've got a lot of quotes to pull from here.
Let me see.
Do you agree that these are dysfunctional families that you write about?
I don't necessarily think so.
Or do you?
Oh, yeah.
I think all families are dysfunctional to a certain degree.
Yeah.
What is dysfunction?
I don't see it as such a pejorative.
I think...
I think what I battle against a lot of times is that level of denial that people have, that everything's perfect, everything's right.
Because I think when you're going around thinking everything's perfect, you're not really looking at what's going on in your family, and there's a much bigger chance that you're going to make a fatal mistake.
I think if you're more willing to see that, you know, they're made up of people, and people have their flaws and their faults and their...
Yeah, no, I do.
Is there an uplifting element here for you?
Well, yeah.
For me, there is.
I mean, I think... I think if you're willing to look at things the way they are, as much as you can, you're less apt to make bad mistakes.
And then... And you're less apt to see these things, to keep them secret, and to think...
You know, our family is the only family that this awful stuff goes on in.
Everyone else is out there, you know, having a great time.
And, I mean, we're all in this boat together.
We all are doing essentially the same kinds of things.
And I just think it's more helpful to admit that than it is to deny it.
So you don't see this book as a downer?
I don't, no.
I don't even see it as... It's funny, though.
Because several bookstore owners that I've met have said, well, I like this book a lot, but boy, it's really sad.
And I said, it is?
And they went, well, yes, it's sad.
The father dies and the woman has to go on without him.
And I think, uh-oh, well, I better be careful about it.
It's not sad.
But, you know, it is, in that sense, it is my grandparent's story.
I grew up with that story.
I grew up with a very strong grandmother and her sister, my great aunt, who lived with her and raised those kids for 40 years.
And when I read on the book jacket that this was a tragedy, the word just jumped out at me.
Well, that's people who don't understand the word tragedy either.
People who use the word tragedy don't understand what it means, I think.
you know, but that's a whole other story.
Right.
Yeah.
But I, I never thought of that.
I, I mean, you know, there are, there are incidents that happen in people's lives that are sad, but I don't think that makes your life sad.
I think whether your life is sad or happy is again, more of an internal thing.
It's your decision about how you're going to view this stuff.
Well, I did an interview with Harold Bloom a couple of months ago, uh,
And he said, well, he wrote this book.
One of the things that was driving him nuts was this new fascination for the so-called near-death experience.
He said, for God's sakes, all of life is a near-death experience.
It is.
Driving on the highway.
And the thing is, it can change in two minutes, can't it?
Yeah.
And I found through life that the biggest things do happen so totally unexpectedly, too, don't they?
Well, that just triggers one of my most favorite quotes by Iris Murdoch.
There is no order in the world.
There is only chance and the terror of chance.
John Chancellor, the late John Chancellor, it was a wonderful obituary of him in the New York Times, and then he said his favorite quote was when he learned he had cancer, he says, if you really want to make God laugh, tell him your plans.
Is that a good one?
Yeah, I mean, tell them what your 20-year plan is, in other words, what you expect to be doing 20 years from now or even 10 years from now.
Ooh, that's scary.
You know, if you want to make God laugh, right, which is, I love that quote.
Well, listen, I think I've got plenty of stuff here.
Good.
And I think maybe, do you foresee a sequel coming out of this?
Yeah, I do.
I actually, I've actually already started.
Oh, really?
I mean, it seems like it's natural for a sequel.
I mean, there is a lot of unfinished business here, shall we say.
Yeah, there is.
There is.
Are you working on it?
Yeah, I am.
I'm going to be working on it for the next couple weeks because I have to go on tour and touring is so arduous.
So who's going to be the center?
Give me an idea.
Who do you think?
It's got to be Julie, I think, of course.
Yeah, well, I've been reading books for a long time.
I think that's funny, though, because people seem to always guess her.
And I would think, well, why not Harry or why not Annie?
What's going to happen to her?
She has more possibilities.
Yeah, Julie.
Because really, I can't predict what you'll do with her.
And that's good.
Good.
I mean, maybe I could, but I'd be wrong, you know.
So I think I'll just wait and read what you do.
But you're not going to take 10 years, are you?
God, I hope not.
When do you think?
My agent says, hey, I ain't getting any younger.
Come on.
Beat it up, girl.
That's great.
Do you have a title?
No, I don't.
I don't have a title.
You're going to keep her out where she is?
Keep her where she is?
What do you mean?
Well, I mean in terms of place and stuff, do you see?
Keep her where she is, yeah, but not the age she is.
Okay.
She's going to be, it jumps forward about 10 years.
Okay, well, it'll be fun.
Yeah, it will be fun.
Look forward to it.
Well, thanks.
And I enjoyed our conversation.
You too, thanks for calling.
Okay, one other question if you don't mind, because if you don't want to tell me, that's okay, but do you mind telling me your age?
Oh, no, I'm 60.
Okay.
60.
Great.
You don't mind my using that in the story?
I don't mind.
Terrific.
Okay.
Thanks a lot.
Bye-bye.